Hypromellose is widely used in oral, ophthalmic, nasal, and topical
pharmaceutical formulations.
In oral products, hypromellose is primarily used as a tablet
binder,(1) in film-coating,(2–7) and as a matrix for use in extended-
release tablet formulations.(8–12) Concentrations between 2% and
5% w/w may be used as a binder in either wet- or dry-granulation
processes. High-viscosity grades may be used to retard the release of
drugs from a matrix at levels of 10–80% w/w in tablets and
capsules. Hypromellose is also used in liquid oral dosage forms as a
suspending and/or thickening agent at concentrations ranging from
0.25–5.0%.(13)
Depending upon the viscosity grade, concentrations of 2–20%
w/w are used for film-forming solutions to film-coat tablets. Lower-
viscosity grades are used in aqueous film-coating solutions, while

higher-viscosity grades are used with organic solvents. Examples of
film-coating materials that are commercially available include
AnyCoat C, Spectracel, Pharmacoat, and the Methocel E Premium
LV series.
Hypromellose is also used as a suspending and thickening agent
in topical formulations. Compared with methylcellulose, hypro-
mellose produces aqueous solutions of greater clarity, with fewer
undissolved fibers present, and is therefore preferred in formula-
tions for ophthalmic use. Hypromellose at concentrations between
0.45–1.0% w/w may be added as a thickening agent to vehicles for
eye drops and artificial tear solutions. It is also used commercially in
liquid nasal formulations at a concentration of 0.1%.(13)
Hypromellose is used as an emulsifier, suspending agent, and
stabilizing agent in topical gels and ointments. As a protective
colloid, it can prevent droplets and particles from coalescing or
agglomerating, thus inhibiting the formation of sediments.
In addition, hypromellose is used in the manufacture of capsules,
as an adhesive in plastic bandages, and as a wetting agent for hard
contact lenses. It is also widely used in cosmetics and food products.
